..
 This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported
 License.

 http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode

==============
VLAN aware VMs
==============

https://blueprints.launchpad.net/dragonflow/+spec/vlan-trunk

 There are various use cases where it would be useful to allow a VM
 to be attached to multiple networks using VLANs as a local
 encapsulation method.

Problem Description
===================

It is useful to allow a VM to attach to different networks using a single
port, and have the VM dictate which traffic goes to which network. The
use cases for this are:

* Some applications have requirements to connect to many (say, hundreds)
  of Neutron networks. It is more practical to use a single or other
  small number of VIFs and use VLANs to differentiate traffic for each
  network than to have hundreds of VIFs per VM.

* Cloud workloads are often very dynamic. It may be more efficient and/or
  less complex to add/remove VLANs than to hotplug interfaces in a VM.

* A VM could be moved from one network to another without detaching
  the VIF from the VM.

* A VM may be running many containers. Each container may have
  requirements to be connected to different Neutron networks. Assigning
  a VLAN (or other encapsulation) id for each container is more efficient
  and scalable than requiring a vNIC per container.

* There are legacy applications that expect to use VLANs as a way to connect
  to multiple networks. Neutron provides a way to expose that model
  to the VM decoupled from how the network is actually implemented.
  Dragonflow should support this as a backend.

This information is also available on the Neutron side [1]_.

Currently, this is not implemented in Dragonflow. A VLAN-tagged packet is
treated like a regular packet, and passed as is. Tagged packets should appear
as if they are untagged from the virtual port.

Proposed Change
===============

Dragonflow will be notified by the API layer which ports are VLAN-tagged, to
which port they are attached, and what is their segmentation ID. The data
should be stored such that if new tagging methods (e.g. encapsulation, MPLS)
need to be added, there will be no change to the model and API layer.

In Dragonflow, it is very easy to identify from which port and network a
packet is received.  This information is stored in OVS metadata by the
classification application. The network is stored in the metadata. The
destination port information is also stored in OVS metadata during
packet dispatch.

Data-Model Impact
-----------------

The Neutron API proposes two structures: `trunks` and `subports`.

`trunks` are only used to state that a port has subports, and acts as a
reference between subports and ports. We propose to ignore this object
in the Dragonflow database. The Neutron API is not modified, but there will
be no matching `Trunk` object in Dragonflow.

`subports` link two `port` objects. One is the parent port, which is
connected to the VM, and the second is a virtual port. There may be many
`subports` linking to a single parent port, but at most one `subport`
linking a virtual port.

We propose the following object: `ChildPortSegmentation`, with the
following fields:

* `id` - The ID of the `ChildPortSegmentation`. This value is not provided
  by Neutron, and will be generated by Dragonflow's Neutron driver.

* `parent` - A reference to the parent port

* `port` - A reference to the virtual port

* `segmentation_type` - The type of tagging used. Currently, only 'vlan' is
  supported.

* `segmentation_id` - The value of the tag used on this port.

API Impact
----------

Dragonflow will provide a driver to Neutron's trunk service [2]_ [3]_.

Dragonflow will register to the events for adding supborts and removing
subports.

The add suports handler will create a ChildPortSegmentation objects in
the NB DB.

The delete subports handler will delete the ChildPortSegmentation objects
from the NB DB.

An endpoint will be added to `setup.cfg` to allow easy loading of the DF
VLAN aware VMs service plugin.

Local-Controller Impact
-----------------------

A VLAN-aware-VM application will be written, implementing the changes in this
section.

When a ChildPortSegmentation is created, a classification flow entry
will be added detecting packets tagged with the given type, and the tag
value of the given ID.

The classification flow will attach the relevant `reg6` and metadata `values`.

The classification flow will strip the VLAN tag.

The classification flow will have higher priority than the flows in
the classification app. If the type or tag do not match an existing
ChildPortSegmentation, it will fall back to the previous behaviour
(the tag is ignored and passed as-is)

For instance, let's assume that a parent port has id `0x166`,
and ofport `183`. It is connected to network `1`. There's also a
`ChildPortSegmentation` with segmentation type vlan and id `100`. Its
ID is `0x168` and it's connected to network `2`.

The following flows will be created:

::

  table=0, priority=150,in_port=183,vlan,vlan_tag=100 actions=strip_vlan,load:0x168->NXM_NX_REG6[],load:0x2->OXM_OF_METADATA[],resubmit(,5)
  table=0, priority=100,in_port=183 actions=load:0x166->NXM_NX_REG6[],load:0x1->OXM_OF_METADATA[],resubmit(,5)

When a ChildPortSegmentation is created, a dispatch flow will be created
to match its `reg7` value.

The dispatch flow will tag the packet, and send it to the parent port.

The flow will not conflict with classification app's dispatch flow, since they
match different `reg7` values.

For example, the same ports above will create the following flows.

::

  table=115, priority=100,reg7=0x168 actions=mod_vlan_vid:vlan_vid:0x10064,output:183
  table=115, priority=100,reg7=0x166 actions=output:183

Other Dragonflow applications will be updated to use port's unique key
(`reg6`/`reg7`) value, rather than relying on the `in_port`.

Devstack Impact
---------------

A devstack option will exist to enable VLAN aware VMs.

This option will add the VLAN aware VMs application to the apps list.

This option will configure Neutron's config file to use Dragonflow's VLAN
aware VMs service plugin.

This option can be enabled by enabling the `q-trunk` service in local.conf.
The Dragonflow `plugin.sh` will detect the service is enabled, and treat it
as the option described above.

Work Items
----------

* Change Dragonflow apps to use unique key rather than in_port. Some apps are
  exempted, e.g. classification, tunneling, since these apps do need to work
  on the of-ports, rather than the Dragonflow logical ports.

  * port security

  * l3 (proactive and reactive)

  * dhcp

  * security groups

  * dnat

  * active_port_detection_app.py

  * metadata

* Implement data model

* Implement Neutron service driver

* Implement VLAN aware VMs app

* Implement devstack changes

* Add fullstack tests

References
==========

.. [1] https://specs.openstack.org/openstack/neutron-specs/specs/newton/vlan-aware-vms.html

.. [2] https://review.openstack.org/#/c/320092/

.. [3] https://review.openstack.org/#/c/341212/
